.\" Copyright: 1994 Ian A. Murdock <imurdock@debian.org>
.\"            1995 Ted Hajek <tedhajek@boombox.micro.umn.edu>
.\"            1997-1999 Guy Maor
.\"            2000-2003 Roland Bauerschmidt <rb@debian.org>
.\"            2004-2022 Marc Haber <mh+debian-packages@zugschlus.de
.\"            2005-2009 Jörg Hoh <joerg@joerghoh.de
.\"            2006-2011 Stephen Gran <sgran@debian.org>
.\"            2011 Justin B Rye <jbr@edlug.org.uk>
.\"            2016 Afif Elghraoui <afif@debian.org>
.\"            2016 Helge Kreutzmann <debian@helgefjell.de>
.\"            2021-2022 Jason Franklin <jason@oneway.dev>
.\"            2022 Matt Barry <matt@hazelmollusk.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; see the GNU General Public License version
.\" 2 or later for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty.
.TH ADDUSER 8 "" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NAME
adduser, addgroup \- add or manipulate users or groups
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY adduser
.OP \-\-add\-extra\-groups
.OP \-\-allow\-all\-names
.OP \-\-allow\-bad\-names
.OP \-\-comment comment
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-debug
.OP \-\-disabled\-login
.OP \-\-disabled\-password
.OP \-\-firstgid id
.OP \-\-firstuid id
.OP \-\-gid id
.OP \-\-home dir
.OP \-\-ingroup group
.OP \-\-lastgid id
.OP \-\-lastuid id
.OP \-\-no\-create\-home
.OP \-\-shell shell
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-uid id
.OP \-\-verbose
.B user
.YS
.SY adduser
.B \-\-system
.OP \-\-comment comment
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-debug
.OP \-\-gid id
.OP \-\-group
.OP \-\-home dir
.OP \-\-ingroup group
.OP \-\-no\-create\-home
.OP \-\-shell shell
.OP \-\-uid id
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-verbose
.B user
.YS
.SY adduser
.B \-\-group
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-debug
.OP \-\-firstgid id
.OP \-\-gid ID
.OP \-\-lastgid id
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-verbose
.B group
.YS
.SY addgroup
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-debug
.OP \-\-firstgid id
.OP \-\-gid ID
.OP \-\-lastgid id
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-verbose
.B group
.YS
.SY addgroup
.B \-\-system
.OP \-\-gid id
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-verbose
.B group
.YS
.SY adduser
.OP \-\-conf file
.OP \-\-debug
.OP \-\-quiet
.OP \-\-verbose
.B user
.B group
.YS
.SY adduser
.B \-\-help
.YS
.SY adduser
.B \-\-version
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBadduser\fP and \fBaddgroup\fP add users and groups to the system
according to command line options
and configuration information in \fI/etc/adduser.conf\fP.
They are friendlier front ends to the low level tools like
\fBuseradd\fP, \fBgroupadd\fP and \fBusermod\fP programs,
by default choosing Debian policy conformant UID and GID values,
creating a home directory with skeletal configuration,
running a custom script,
and other features.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP and \fBaddgroup\fP are intended as a policy layer,
making it easier for package maintainers and local administrators
to create local system accounts
in the way Debian expects them to be created,
taking the burden to adapt to the probably changing specifications
of Debian policy.
\fBadduser \-\-system\fP takes special attention
on just needing a single call in the package maintainer scripts
without any conditional wrappers,
error suppression or other scaffolding.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP honors the distinction between
\fIdynamically allocated system users and groups\fP
and
\fIdynamically allocated user accounts\fP
that is documented in Debian Policy, Chapter 9.2.2.
.PP
For a full list and explanations of all options,
see the OPTIONS section.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP and \fBaddgroup\fP can be run in one of five modes:
.SS "Add a normal user"
If called with one non-option argument and
without the \fB\-\-system\fP or \fB\-\-group\fP  options,
\fBadduser\fP will add a normal user,
that means a
\fIdynamically allocated user account\fP
in the sense of Debian Policy.
This is commonly referred to in \fBadduser\fP as a \fInon-system user.\fP
.PP
\fBadduser\fP will choose the first available UID
from the range specified by
\fBFIRST_UID\fP and \fBLAST_UID\fP
in the configuration file.
The range may be overridden with the
\fB\-\-firstuid\fP and \fB\-\-lastuid\fP options.
Finally, the UID can be set fully manually with the \fB\-\-uid\fP option.
.PP
By default, each user is given a corresponding group with the same name.
This is commonly called
\fIUsergroups\fP
and allows group writable directories to be easily maintained
by placing the appropriate users in the new group,
setting the set-group-ID bit in the directory,
and ensuring that all users use a umask of 002.
.PP
For a usergroup,
\fBadduser\fP will choose the first available GID
from the range specified by
\fBFIRST_GID\fP and \fBLAST_GID\fP
in the configuration file.
The range may be overridden with the
\fB\-\-firstgid\fP and \fB\-\-lastgid\fP options.
Finally, the GID can be set fully manually with the \fB\-\-gid\fP option.
.PP
The interaction between
\fBUSERS_GID\fP, \fBUSERS_GROUP\fP, and \fBUSERGROUPS\fP
is explained in detail in
.BR adduser.conf (5).
.PP
Users' primary groups can also be overridden
from the command line
with the \fB\-\-gid\fP  or \fB\-\-ingroup\fP options
to set the group by id or name,
respectively.
Also,
users can be added
to one or more supplemental groups
defined as \fBEXTRA_GROUPS\fP in the configuration file
either by setting \fBADD_EXTRA_GROUPS\fP to 1
in the configuration file,
or by passing \fB\-\-add\-extra\-groups\fP on the command line.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP will copy files from \fI/etc/skel\fP
into the home directory and
prompt for the comment field and a password
if those functions have not been turned off / overridden
from the command line.
.PP
UID, comment, home directory and shell
might be pre-determined with the \fBUID_POOL\fP and \fBGID_POOL\fP option,
documented in
.BR adduser.conf (5).

.SS "Add a system user"
If called with one non-option argument and the \fB\-\-system\fP option,
\fBadduser\fP will add a
\fIdynamically allocated system user,\fP
often abbreviated as
\fIsystem user\fP
in the context of the \fBadduser\fP package.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP will choose the first available UID
from the range specified by
\fBFIRST_SYSTEM_UID\fP and \fBLAST_SYSTEM_UID\fP
in the configuration file.
This can be overridden with the \fB\-\-uid\fP option.
.PP
By default, system users are placed in the \fBnogroup\fP group.
To place the new system user in an already existing group,
use the \fB\-\-gid\fP or \fB\-\-ingroup\fP options.
If the \fB\-\-group\fP is given
and the identically named group does not already exist,
it is created with the same ID.
.PP
If no home directory is specified,
the default home directory for a new system user
is \fI\%/nonexistent\fP.
This directory should never exist on any Debian system,
and \fBadduser\fP will never create it automatically.
.PP
Unless a shell is explicitly set with the \fB\-\-shell\fP option,
the new system user will have the shell set to
\fI/usr/sbin/nologin\fP.
\fBadduser \-\-system\fP does not set a password for the new account.
Skeletal configuration files are not copied.
.PP
Other options will behave as for the creation of a normal user.
The files referenced by \fBUID_POOL\fP and \fBGID_POOL\fP do also work.

.SS "Add a group"
If \fBadduser\fP is called with the \fB\-\-group\fP option and
without the \fB\-\-system\fP option, or
\fBaddgroup\fP is called respectively,
a user group will be added.
.PP
A
\fIdynamically allocated system group,\fP
often abbreviated as \fIsystem group\fP
in the context of the \fBadduser\fP package,
will be created
if \fBadduser\fP is called with the \fB\-\-system\fP option.
.PP
A GID will be chosen from the respective range specified for GIDs
in the configuration file
(\fBFIRST_GID\fP, \fBLAST_GID\fP,
\fBFIRST_SYSTEM_GID\fP, \fBLAST_SYSTEM_GID\fP).
To override that mechanism,
you can give the GID using the \fB\-\-gid\fP option.
.PP
For non-system groups,
the range specified in the configuration file may be overridden
with the \fB\-\-firstgid\fP and \fB\-\-lastgid\fP options.
.PP
The group is created with no members.

.SS "Add an existing user to an existing group"
If called with two non-option arguments,
\fBadduser\fP will add an existing user to an existing group.

.SH OPTIONS
Different modes of \fBadduser\fP allow different options.
If no valid modes are listed for a option,
it is accepted in all modes.
.PP
Short versions for certain options may exist for historical reasons.
They are going to stay supported, but are removed from the documentation.
Users are advised to migrate to the long version of options.
.TP
.B \-\-add\-extra\-groups
Add new user to extra groups defined in the configuration files'
\fBEXTRA_GROUPS\fP setting.
The old spelling \fB\-\-add_extra_groups\fP is deprecated and
will be supported in Debian bookworm only.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-all\-names
Allow any user- and groupname which is supported by the underlying
\fBuseradd\fP(8), including names containing non-ASCII characters.
See VALID NAMES in
.BR adduser.conf (5).
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP,
\fBaddgroup\fP, \fBaddgroup \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-bad\-names
Disable \fBNAME_REGEX\fP and \fBSYS_NAME_REGEX\fP check of names.
Only a weaker check for validity of the name is applied.
See VALID NAMES in
.BR adduser.conf (5).
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP,
\fBaddgroup\fP, \fBaddgroup \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-comment " comment "
Set the comment field for the new entry generated.
\fBadduser\fP will not ask for the information if this option is given.
This field is also known under the name GECOS field
and contains information that is used by the \fBfinger\fR(1) command.
This used to be the \fB\-\-gecos\fR option,
which is deprecated and will be removed after Debian bookworm.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-conf " file "
Use \fIfile\fP instead of \fI/etc/adduser.conf\fP.
Multiple \fB\-\-conf\fR options can be given.
.TP
.BR \-\-debug
Activate debugging code.
.TP
.B \-\-disabled\-login
.TQ
.B \-\-disabled\-password
Do not run \fBpasswd\fP(1) to set a password.
In most situations, logins are still possible though
(for example using SSH keys or through PAM)
for reasons that are beyond \fBadduser\fP's scope.
\fB\-\-disabled\-login\fP will additionally set the shell to
\fI/usr/sbin/nologin\fP.
Valid Mode: \fBadduser\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-firstuid " ID "
.TQ
.BI \-\-lastuid " ID "
.TQ
.BI \-\-firstgid " ID "
.TQ
.BI \-\-lastgid " ID "
Override the first UID / last UID / first GID / last GID
in the range that the uid is chosen from
(\fBFIRST_UID\fP, \fBLAST_UID\fP, \fBFIRST_GID\fP and \fBLAST_GID\fP,
\fBFIRST_SYSTEM_UID\fP, \fBLAST_SYSTEM_UID\fP,
\fBFIRST_SYSTEM_GID\fP and \fBLAST_SYSTEM_GID\fP
in the configuration file).
If a group is created as a usergroup,
\fB\-\-firstgid\fP and \fB\-\-lastgid\fP
are ignored.
The group gets the same ID as the user.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP,
for \fP\-\-firstgid\fP and \fB\-\-lastgid\fR also
\fBaddgroup\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-force\-badname
.TQ
.B \-\-allow\-badname
These are the deprecated forms of \fB\-\-allow\-bad\-names\fR.
It will be removed
during the release cycle of the Debian release after \fIbookworm\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-gid " ID "
When creating a group,
this option sets the group ID number of the new group to \fIGID\fP.
When creating a user,
this option sets the primary group ID number of the new user
to \fIGID\fP.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP,
\fBaddgroup\fP, \fBaddgroup \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-group
Using this option in \fBadduser --system\fP
indicates that the new user should get
an identically named group as its primary group.
If that identically named group is not already present, it is created.
If not combined with \fB\-\-system\fP,
a group with the given name is created.
The latter is the default action if
the program is invoked as \fBaddgroup\fP.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser \-\-system\fP,
\fBaddgroup\fP, \fBaddgroup \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Display brief instructions.
.TP
.BI \-\-home " dir "
Use \fIdir\fP as the user's home directory,
rather than the default specified by the configuration file
(or \fI/nonexistent\fP if \fBadduser \-\-system\fP is used).
If the directory does not exist, it is created.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-ingroup " GROUP "
When creating a user,
this option sets the primary group ID number of the new user
to the GID of the named group.
Unlike with the \fB\-\-gid\fP option,
the group is specified here by name rather than by numeric ID number.
The group must already exist.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-lastuid " ID "
.TQ
.BI \-\-lastgid " ID "
Override the last UID / last GID.
See \fB\-\-firstuid\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-create\-home
Do not create a home directory for the new user.
Note that the pathname for the new user's home directory
will still be entered in the appropriate field
in the \fI\%/etc/passwd\fP file.
The use of this option does not imply that this field should be empty.
Rather, it indicates to \fB\%adduser\fP
that some other mechanism will be responsible
for initializing the new user's home directory.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BR \-\-quiet
Suppress informational messages, only show warnings and errors.
.TP
.BI \-\-shell " shell "
Use \fIshell\fP as the user's login shell,
rather than the default specified by the configuration file
(or \fI/usr/sbin/nologin\fP if \fBadduser \-\-system\fP is used).
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-system
Nomally, \fBadduser\fP creates
\fIdynamically allocated user accounts and groups\fP
as defined in Debian Policy, Chapter 9.2.2.
With this option, \fBadduser\fP creates a
\fIdynamically allocated system user and group\fP
and changes its mode respectively.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBaddgroup\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-uid  " ID "
Force the new userid to be the given number.
\fBadduser\fP will fail if the userid is already taken.
Valid Modes: \fBadduser\fP, \fBadduser \-\-system\fP.
.TP
.BR \-\-verbose
Be more verbose.
.TP
.BR \-v " , " \-\-version
Display version and copyright information.

.SH EXIT VALUES

.TP
.B 0
Success: The user or group exists as specified.
This can have 2 causes:
The user or group was created by this call to \fBadduser\fP
or the user or group was already present on the system
as specified before \fBadduser\fP was invoked.
If \fBadduser \-\-system\fP is invoked for a user
already existing as a system user, it will also return 0.
.TP
.B 1
Creating the non-system user or group failed
because it was already present.
The username or groupname was rejected
because of a mismatch with the configured regular expressions, see
.BR adduser.conf (5).
\fBadduser\fP has been aborted by a signal.
.PP
Or for many other yet undocumented reasons which
are printed to console then.
You may then consider to remove \fB\-\-quiet\fP
to make \fBadduser\fP more verbose.

.SH SECURITY
\fBadduser\fP needs root privileges and offers,
via the \fB\-\-conf\fP command line option
to use different configuration files.
Do not use \fBsudo\fP(8) or similar tools to
give partial privileges to \fBadduser\fP
with restricted command line parameters.
This is easy to circumvent and might
allow users to create arbitrary accounts.
If you want this,
consider writing your own wrapper script
and giving privileges to execute that script.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/adduser.conf
Default configuration file for \fBadduser\fP(8) and \fBaddgroup\fP(8)
.TP
.I /usr/local/sbin/adduser.local
Optional custom add-ons, see
.BR adduser.local (8)
.

.SH NOTES
Unfortunately, the term
\fIsystem account\fP
suffers from double use in Debian.
It both means an account for the actual Debian system,
distinguishing itself from an \fIapplication account\fP
which might exist in the user database
of some application running on Debian.
A \fIsystem account\fP in this definition has the potential
to log in to the actual system, has a UID,
can be member in system groups,
can own files and processes.
Debian Policy, au contraire, in its Chapter 9.2.2,
makes a distinguishment of
\fIdynamically allocated system users and groups\fP and
\fIdynamically allocated user accounts\fP,
meaning in both cases special instances of \fIsystem accounts\fP.
Care must be taken to not confuse this terminology.
Since \fBadduser\fP and \fBdeluser\fP(8) never address
\fIapplication accounts\fP and
everything in this package concerns \fIsystem accounts\fP here,
the usage of the terms \fIuser account\fP and \fIsystem account\fP
is actually not ambiguous in the context of this package.
For clarity, this document uses the definition
\fIlocal system account or group\fP if the distinction to
\fIapplication accounts\fP or
accounts managed in a directory service is needed.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP used to have the vision to be the universal front end
to the various directory services for
creation and deletion of regular and system accounts in Debian
since the 1990ies.
This vision has been abandoned as of 2022.
The rationale behind this includes:
that in practice,
a small server system is not going to have
write access to an enterprise-wide directory service anyway,
that locally installed packages are hard to manage with
centrally controlled system accounts,
that enterprise directory services have
their own management processes anyway and
that the personpower of the \fBadduser\fP team
is unlikely to be ever strong enough to write and maintain support for
the plethora of directory services that need support.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP will constrict itself to being a policy layer
for the management of local system accounts,
using the tools from the \fBpassword\fP package for the actual work.

.SH BUGS
Inconsistent use of terminology around the term \fIsystem account\fP
in docs and code is a bug.
Please report this and allow us to improve our docs.
.PP
\fBadduser\fP takes special attention to be directly usable in
Debian maintainer scripts without conditional wrappers,
error suppression and other scaffolding.
The only thing that the package maintainer should need to code
is a check for the presence of the executable in the postrm script.
The \fBadduser\fP maintainers consider the need
for additional scaffolding a bug and
encourage their fellow Debian package maintainers
to file bugs against the \fBadduser\fP package in this case.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR adduser.conf (5),
.BR deluser (8),
.BR groupadd (8),
.BR useradd (8),
.BR usermod (8),
Debian Policy 9.2.2.
