.\" Copyright: 1995 Ted Hajek <tedhajek@boombox.micro.umn.edu>
.\"            2000-2003 Roland Bauerschmidt <rb@debian.org>
.\"            2004-2022 Marc Haber <mh+debian-packages@zugschlus.de>
.\"            2006-2008 Stephen Gran <sgran@debian.org>
.\"            2007 Jörg Hoh <joerg@joerghoh.de>
.\"            2016 Afif Elghraoui <afif@debian.org>
.\"            2016 Helge Kreutzmann <debian@helgefjell.de>
.\"            2021 Jason Franklin <jason@oneway.dev>
.\"            2022 Matt Barry <matt@hazelmollusk.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; see the GNU General Public License version 2
.\" or later for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty.
.TH ADDUSER.CONF 5 "" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NAME
/etc/adduser.conf \- configuration file for
.BR adduser (8)
and
.BR addgroup (8)
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file \fI/etc/adduser.conf\fP contains defaults for the programs
.BR adduser (8),
.BR addgroup (8),
.BR deluser (8)
and
.BR delgroup (8).
Each line holds a single value pair in the form \fIoption\fP = \fIvalue\fP.
Double or single quotes are allowed around the value,
as is whitespace around the equals sign.
Comment lines must have a hash sign (#) in the first column.
.PP
The valid configuration options are:
.TP
.B ADD_EXTRA_GROUPS
Setting this to something other than 0
will cause \fBadduser\fP to add
newly created non-system users
to the list of groups defined by \fBEXTRA_GROUPS\fP (below).
Defaults to \fI0\fP.
.TP
.B DIR_MODE
The permissions mode for home directories of non-system users
that are created by \fBadduser\fP(8).
Defaults to \fI0700\fP.
Note that there are potential configurations
(such as /~user web services, or in-home mail delivery)
which will require changes to the default.
See also \fBSYS_DIR_MODE\fP.
.TP
.B DHOME
The directory in which new home directories should be created.
Defaults to \fI/home\fP.
.TP
.B DSHELL
The login shell to be used for all new users.
Defaults to \fI/bin/bash\fP.
.TP
.B EXTRA_GROUPS
This is the space-separated list of groups that
new non-system users will be added to.
Defaults to \fIusers\fP.
.TP
.B FIRST_SYSTEM_GID " and " LAST_SYSTEM_GID
specify an inclusive range of GIDs from which GIDs
for system groups can be dynamically allocated.
Defaults to \fI100\fP - \fI999\fP.
.TP
.B FIRST_GID " and " LAST_GID
specify an inclusive range of GIDs from which GIDs
for non-system groups can be dynamically allocated.
Defaults to \fI1000\fP - \fI59999\fP.
.TP
.B FIRST_SYSTEM_UID " and " LAST_SYSTEM_UID
specify an inclusive range of UIDs from which UIDs
for system users can be dynamically allocated.
Defaults to \fI100\fP - \fI999\fP.
Please note that system software,
such as the users allocated by the \fIbase-passwd\fP package,
may assume that UIDs less than 100 are unallocated.
.TP
.B FIRST_UID " and " LAST_UID
specify an inclusive range of UIDs from which UIDs
for non-system users can be dynamically allocated.
Defaults to \fI1000\fP - \fI59999\fP.
.TP
.B GID_POOL
See \fBUID_POOL\fP.
.TP
.B GROUPHOMES
If this is set to \fIyes\fP,
the home directories will be created as \fI/home/groupname/user\fP.
Defaults to \fIno\fP. This option is \fBdeprecated\fP and will be removed.
.TP
.B LAST_GID
.TQ
.B LAST_SYSTEM_GID
.TQ
.B LAST_UID
.TQ
.B LAST_SYSTEM_UID
See the \fBFIRST_\fP variants of the option.
.TP
.B LETTERHOMES
If this is set to \fIyes\fP,
then the home directories created will have an extra directory
inserted which is the first letter of the loginname.
For example: \fI/home/u/user\fP.
Defaults to \fIno\fP. This option is \fBdeprecated\fP and will be removed.
.TP
.B NAME_REGEX
Non-system user- and groupnames are checked against this regular expression.
If the name doesn't match this regexp,
user and group creation in \fBadduser\fR(8) is refused
unless \fB\-\-allow\-bad\-names\fR is set.
With \fB\-\-allow\-bad\-names\fR set,
weaker checks are performed.
Defaults to the most conservative \fI^[a\-z][\-a\-z0\-9_]*$\fP.
See \fBSYS_NAME_REGXEX\fP and \fBValid names\fP,
below, for more information.
.TP
.B QUOTAUSER
If set to a nonempty value,
new users will have quotas copied from that user using
\fIedquota -p QUOTAUSER newuser\fP.
Defaults to \fIthe empty string\fP.
.TP
.B SETGID_HOME
If this is set to \fIyes\fP,
then home directories for users with
their own group (\fBUSERGROUPS\fP = yes)
will have the set-group-ID bit set.
Note that this feature is \fBdeprecated\fP and
will be removed in a future version of \fBadduser\fP(8).
Please use \fBDIR_MODE\fP instead.
Defaults to \fIno\fP.
.TP
.B SKEL
The directory from which
skeletal user configuration files will be copied.
Defaults to \fI/etc/skel\fP.
.TP
.B SKEL_IGNORE_REGEX
When populating the newly created home directory of a non-system user,
files in SKEL matching this regex are not copied.
Defaults to to
\fI(.(dpkg|ucf)\-(old|new|dist)$)\fP,
the regular expression matching files left over from unmerged config files.
.TP
.B SYS_DIR_MODE
The permissions mode for home directories of system users
that are created by \fBadduser\fP(8).
Defaults to \fI0755\fP.
Note that changing the default permissions for system users
may cause some packages to behave unreliably,
if the program relies on the default setting.
See also \fBDIR_MODE\fP.
.TP
.B SYS_NAME_REGEX
System user- and groupnames are checked against this regular expression.
If the name doesn't match this regexp,
system user and group creation in adduser is refused
unless \fB\-\-allow\-bad\-names\fP is set.
With \fB\-\-allow\-bad\-names\fP set,
weaker checks are performed.
Defaults to the most conservative \fI^[a\-z_][\-a\-z0\-9_]*$\fP.
See \fBNAME_REGEX\fP, above, and \fBValid names\fP,
below, for more information.
.TP
.B UID_POOL " and " GID_POOL
specify a file or a directory containing UID and GID pool files.
See UID and GID POOLS in the NOTES section.
Both default to \fIempty\fP.
.TP
.B USERGROUPS
Specify whether each created non-system user will be
given their own group to use.
Defaults to \fIyes\fP.
.TP
.B USERS_GID " and " USERS_GROUP
Defines the groupname or GID of the group
all newly-created non-system users are placed into.
If \fBUSERGROUPS\fP is \fIyes,\fP
the group will be added as a supplementary group;
if \fBUSERGROUPS\fP is \fIno,\fP,
it will be the primary group.
If you don't want all your users to be in one group,
set \fBUSERGROUPS\fP=\fIyes\fP,
leave \fBUSERS_GROUP\fP empty and set \fBUSERS_GID\fP to "\-1".
\fBUSERS_GROUP\fP defaults to \fIusers\fP,
which has GID 100 on all Debian systems since
it's defined statically by the \fIbase-passwd\fP package.
It is a configuration error to define both variables
even if the values are consistent.
.SH NOTES
.SS VALID NAMES
Historically,
\fBadduser\fP(8) and \fBaddgroup\fP(8) enforced
conformity to IEEE Std 1003.1-2001,
which allows only the following characters to appear
in group- and usernames:
letters, digits, underscores, periods, at signs (@) and dashes.
The name may not start with a dash or @.
The "$" sign is allowed at the end of usernames
to allow typical Samba machine accounts.
.PP
The default settings for \fBNAME_REGEX\fP and \fBSYS_NAME_REGEX\fP
allow usernames to contain lowercase letters and numbers,
plus dash (\-) and underscore (_);
the name must begin with a letter
(or an underscore for system users).
.PP
The least restrictive policy,
available by using the \fB\-\-allow-all-names\fP option,
simply makes the same checks as \fBuseradd\fP(8):
cannot start with a dash, plus sign, or tilde;
and cannot contain a colon, comma, slash, or whitespace.
.PP
This option can be used to create confusing or misleading names;
use it with caution.
.PP
Please note that regardless of
the regular expressions used to evaluate the username,
it may be a maximum of 32 bytes;
this may be less than 32 visual characters
when using Unicode glyphs in the username.
.SS UID AND GID POOLS
Some installations desire that a non-system account
gets preconfigured properties when it is generated.
Commonly, the local admin wants to make sure
that even without using a directory service,
an account or a group with a certain name
has the same numeric UID/GID on all systems
where it exists.
.PP
To enable this feature,
define configuration variables \fBUID_POOL\fP (for user accounts)
and/or \fBGID_POOL\fP (for groups) in \fI/etc/adduser.conf\fP and
install the respective files in the configured places.
The value is either a file or a directory.
In the latter case all files named \fI*.conf\fP
in that directory are considered.
.PP
The file format is similar to \fI/etc/passwd\fP:
Text lines, fields separated by a colon.
The values are
username/groupname (mandatory),
UID/GID (mandatory),
comment field (optional, useful for user IDs only),
home directory (ditto),
shell (ditto).
.PP
It is possible to use the same file/directory for
\fBUID_POOL\fP and \fBGID_POOL\fP.
.PP
If an account / group is created,
\fBadduser\fP(8) searches in all UID/GID pool files
for a line matching the name
of the newly created account and
uses the data found there to initialize the new account
instead of using the defaults.
Settings may be overridden from the command line.

.SH FILES
.I /etc/adduser.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR deluser.conf (5),
.BR addgroup (8),
.BR adduser (8),
.BR delgroup (8),
.BR deluser (8)
