.\" Copyright: 1995 Ted Hajek <tedhajek@boombox.micro.umn.edu>
.\"            2000-2003 Roland Bauerschmidt <rb@debian.org>
.\"            2004-2022 Marc Haber <mh+debian-packages@zugschlus.de>
.\"            2006-2007 Jörg Hoh <joerg@joerghoh.de>
.\"            2011 Stephen Gran <sgran@debian.org>
.\"            2016 Helge Kreutzmann <debian@helgefjell.de>
.\"            2021 Jason Franklin <jason@oneway.dev>
.\"            2022 Matt Barry <matt@hazelmollusk.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; see the GNU General Public Lisence version 2
.\" or later for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty.
.TH DELUSER.CONF 5 "" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH NAME
/etc/deluser.conf \- configuration file for
\fBdeluser\fR(8) and \fBdelgroup\fR(8).
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file \fI/etc/deluser.conf\fR contains defaults for the programs
.B deluser\fR(8)
and
.B \fBdelgroup\fR(8).
Each line holds a single value pair in the form \fIoption\fP = \fIvalue\fP.
Double or single quotes are allowed around the value,
as is whitespace around the equals sign.
Comment lines must have a hash sign (#) in the first column.
.PP
\fBdeluser\fR(8) and \fBdelgroup\fR(8)
also read \fI/etc/adduser.conf\fR, see
.BR adduser.conf (5);
settings in \fIdeluser.conf\fR may overwrite settings made in
\fIadduser.conf\fP.
.PP
The valid configuration options are:
.TP
.B BACKUP
If \fBREMOVE_HOME\fR or \fBREMOVE_ALL_FILES\fR is activated, all
files are backed up before they are removed.
The backup file that is created defaults to \fIusername.tar(.gz|.bz2)\fR
in the directory specified by the \fBBACKUP_TO\fR option.
The compression method is chosen to the best that is available.
Values may be 0 or 1. Defaults to \fI0\fP.
.TP
.B BACKUP_SUFFIX
Select compression algorithm for a home directory backup.
Can be set to any suffix recognized by \fBtar \-\-auto\-compress\fP.
Defaults to \fI.gz\fP.
.TP
.B BACKUP_TO
If
.B BACKUP
is activated,
\fBBACKUP_TO\fR specifies the directory the backup is written to.
Defaults to the current directory.
.TP
.B EXCLUDE_FSTYPES
A regular expression which describes all filesystem types which should
be excluded when looking for files of a user to be deleted. Defaults
to "(proc|sysfs|usbfs|devtmpfs|devpts|afs)".
.TP
.B NO_DEL_PATHS
A list of regular expressions, space separated.
All files to be deleted in course of deleting the home directory or
user-owned files elsewhere are checked against
each of these regular expressions.
If a match is detected, the file is not deleted.
Defaults to a list of system directories, leaving only \fI/home\fR.
Therefore only files below \fI/home\fR belonging
to that specific user are going to be deleted.
.TP
.B ONLY_IF_EMPTY
Only delete a group if there are no users belonging to this group.
Defaults to 0.
.TP
.B REMOVE_ALL_FILES
Removes all files on the system owned by the user to be removed.
If this option is activated \fBREMOVE_HOME\fR has no effect.
Values may be 0 or 1. Defaults to \fI0\fP.
.TP
.B REMOVE_HOME
Removes the home directory and mail spool of the user to be removed.
Value may be 0 (don't delete) or 1 (do delete). Defaults to \fI0\fP.

.SH FILES
.I /etc/deluser.conf
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR adduser.conf (5),
.BR delgroup (8),
.BR deluser (8)
